We've got 20 minutes scheduled for-
Yep
... this hearing.
We've already
got the papers associated with the
original petition,
so we'll leave it in your hands.
Okay.
I guess in terms of responding to the petition,
I guess key thing for me to point out, so I first became head
representation from Northland, I think towards the end of
'24, I think it was.
Organized to go visit when I was up at Waitangi
in '25, saw the
affected farm there, met with farmers,
and then have
further talked to a group from north.
So I guess the key thing I left there was actually
regional council industry groups,
you need to come together with a bit of a plan and then come talk to us,
which they did December last year,
and there is going to be-- So I presented a bit of a
plan, and we need to dig into that a bit more.
John and the team will be having a meeting in April
around that plan. I guess
a couple of points around-Raising
awareness. So I don't know if any of you got to go to the
Northland Field Days, but there was
the NRC tent and On-Farm Support was
opposite from it. So there was a really good awareness
campaign going on there, and really providing
information on what farmers need to look for, what it
looks like.
The On-Farm Support team were telling me about new techniques
they're trialing around using less chemicals
with,
I think it... Forgive me if I get this completely wrong, I'm running off
memory. But mulching the paddocks at certain points of time,
spraying afterwards, and that was having much better results in
terms of controlling at a much lower cost because they're using
less chemicals. So there's good work going on in
terms of that
identification and then knowledge, and to be honest, that's where
I think the bulk
of the effort at this point in time needs to go into.
Making people aware of what it looks like because it looks awfully like a weed
that's been here for a long, long time, and it's also been here for a reasonably
long time. We just mistook it for a long time for that other weed.
So, to me, that's the key thing. Identified early on when it's on your farm,
it's much easier to pull out than the traditional ragwort, as I found out.
Far easier.
I didn't have a sore back after.
Tap root, yeah.
No, no tap root. It's sort of just all fibrous and spread, so it's easy
to pull it out. So if you
start finding small amounts of it on your farm,
that's the point in time to really get into it and rip
it up.
With regard to
the talk of a CAN. So we did originally discuss this
with Northland Regional Council.
They have the ability
to implement a regional CAN.
They decided, and industry groups also decided, no, they didn't want to
do that.
So that's where we've left that. But
apart from me running out of breath, I'll-
Yeah
... what a relief. Cheers. I'll open up to questions.
Okay. We'll start with Jo. She's got a question.
Yeah. Thank you, Minister, for that.
I'm just wondering if there's been any thinking further
to what you've already provided with us this morning about whether at some point
there's going to have to be a bit of a reduction in
movement of, whether it be machinery, whether it be
feed coming out of the area,
in order to reduce the potential risk of spread to other parts of the
country so that it can be well contained.
If there's any thinking done on that, or if not, at what point
might there have to be? Or would there just-
Yeah.
Is it just not something that can be done?
Well, I guess that was the point of the CAN.
Yeah.
Which is what the CAN would do.
Which would be to limit that spread.
So I mean, the locals, they decided they didn't want to go down that
path. I think the key thing is
that
every farmer should actually be aware of where
you're importing your feed from,
where the machinery that's just come onto your farm has come from. Is it clean?
Because you could be picking up weeds
wherever you are in the country.
You could be getting something from a neighboring farm.
Every farmer needs to take responsibility of their own farm's biosecurity.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. I understand
when you say the locals aren't keen on that.
Yeah.
But this isn't just an
issue for the locals if it gets out to other parts of the country, and so
surely, hopefully, there'll be some thinking about how we can
mitigate-
Yes
... the spread of it to other parts of the country, despite
the fact that the locals don't want a CAN or whatever it might be.
Yeah. I mean, maybe-
That's really concerning.
Yeah. So John might be able to better give you an idea as to what
point do
something get up to before we-
Yeah. Yeah
... impose national rules. I don't know if there's been previous examples of that,
John.
Not with a similar weed, but look, some of the challenges with a
CAN are, first of all, we don't fully understand the exact extent of the spread.
Yeah. Yeah.
Therefore, what area are you going to enclose?
Right.
Whatever area you do enclose there, you've got a lot of roads
going in and out.
Yeah.
So it becomes operationally quite challenging.
You've got airborne spread as well.
Mm-hmm.
And we really do think that the better
form of pathway management
is
increased awareness of
identification and the measures that farmers can take to prevent spread.
Yeah.
So good on-farm biosecurity-
Yeah
... both inside and outside the CAN.
And this is a conversation that we have had
ongoing with industry for a long time.
Mm-hmm.
Particularly with weed spread. And things are improving, but there's room for more
improvement, and maybe this is the thing that will give us a big step forward, and
I think that will be a real focus of the discussion that we have with industry in
April.
Yeah. Thank you.
Mike, you had a sup.
Yeah, I just had a sup on that.
Just a couple of things you just mentioned there.
You've got to understand the extent of where it is, what's being done to
actually understand this, so yeah.
Yeah. So
probably a better question for NRC, but they have been doing some
surveillance. And then again, the
campaign that has been running since February, helps us
with what we call passive or community-based surveillance.
So encouraging people to identify it
and advise of new detections. Yeah.
Yeah, and just to sup on probably Jo's
first question is in terms of, yeah, there's an awareness campaign at the field
days. Probably a couple of things out of that.
What was the uptake?At the field days like, and then the other part too
is, to your comment, Minister,
we should all as farmers be aware of where we bring our stock from and all the rest
of it. But what's being done to actually make those farmers outside of
the area- Mm-hmm ... aware of the risk? Mm-hmm.
Because that is the challenge, and I understand there's always a stigma attached
to having something- Yeah ... on your farm, and it does carry
potential consequences or implications as well.
So, I mean, I get it, it's challenging. Yeah.
But
look, in terms of ...
I don't, unless John's got specific numbers
from nor- and it was primarily at the Northland site,
so you'd probably have to talk to them.
So if they say there was only this one guy who came over and asked questions and he
was about six foot and slightly balding, then you know that
it was just me.
And for the better. But. Yeah.
But it was a pretty impressive sight.
There was a lot of good collateral there.
So the feeling I got
from talking to the people at the MPI site, who
they also had some stuff there,
they said they've been having quite a good interaction.
In terms of
wider, I think
that's probably in the next stage is actually we need to get the
industry groups involved, Dairy NZ, Beef and Lamb,
to actually be help spreading this message.
They've probably got better
inroads into farms. So,
the discussion groups in South Auckland, North
Waikato,
those are the places they need to start bringing this up and talking about it.
That's probably going to be the better way
of getting it through rather than us trying to
push out anything.
Yeah. Yeah.
I could add to that, Minister, if you like.
Yeah.
So certainly the staff, the MPI staff that I've spoken to that were at the field
day said really good level volumes of people and levels of engagement
going through that gate.
Yeah.
Look, I apologize, I meant to bring some images to share with the committee of the
advertising campaign and some photos of the stand itself, so I'll send those
through to the clerk to share with you.
Yeah.
But that was the start of a public awareness campaign-
Yeah
... that had been running since February.
So,
advertising-based public awareness campaign.
Mm-hmm.
Print, advertorial, digital,
search, and that has had good reach and good effectiveness.
So, we initiated it with NRC. We co-funded it with NRC.
The digital advertising achieved nearly 900,000
page impressions, that drove more than 8,000 visits to NRC's
website, where they've got a lot of information
on Madagascar ragwort identification and control methods.
So, good first steps.
We'll review that in April, and then we'll look
to improve messaging-
Yep
... reach, extent, and go again.
Yeah.
Geographically, there are
several target areas. So,
using digital, you can target quite accurately.
So people inside what we think is the infestation zone, people
just outside the infestation zone,
the remainder of Northland and then the remainder of the North Island,
with appropriate weighting to those sort of risk profiles.
Yeah. Just on that, what about, not everyone's computer literate.
Mm-hmm.
Particularly the older generation.
Yeah.
What about mail outs and things like that and collateral to actually give
to people to take away with them?
So it's-
Well, that's kind of, I think that's more useful at your field days and the like.
To be honest, if we were to be, it'd be quite an expense to be dropping them in
every letterbox.
And we've only got a set budget for a whole lot of ...
We've also got lots of collateral we want to put out on golden clams, culebra,
all these other issues as well. So, it is
trying to be very targeted with that spend as to where it's
actually going to get the best bang for buck. Yeah. Yep. Steve.
Yeah. Thank you.
In terms of the projected
GDP impacts, as highlighted in the, I'm
actually looking at the placement.
Mm-hmm.
Figure six.
For Northland,
across all regions it's up to 44 million.
And
total losses across the three regions rises to
72 million GDP and 689
full-time jobs by 2055.
And the worst case scenario for all regions is 131 million.
How does that rate against other invasive
plant species that we're dealing with in the primary production sector?
Sean will be able to give much better numbers on that than I will, but I
know wildings, wilding pines probably rate as
vastly more.
Much more significant.
Yeah.
There's, I mean,
what's the Manchurian wild grass up in Northland-
Oh, yeah
... that we're working on at the moment?
I couldn't give you a
GDP figure impact on it.
Oh, right.
But I think the point is that it's a serious weed threat.
Yeah.
The data that sits behind that is quite limited, so two properties.
So, mm-hmm. I've got to go like that a little bit.
Yeah.
But I think it's sufficient to tell us probably what we already knew, that
it is a serious threat if it gets away on us.
Yeah.
And meaning we just do have to get on top of it-
Yeah
... and we have been talking for a while about it.
We're hoping in April we can land a really focused plan to
go ahead of this forthcoming spring.
Yeah.
I think the ... Can I have a sup on that, Mr. Chair?
Yeah. I think that-Pay lots of attention there, moths.
Well observed.
I think the concern that committee had, we previously discussed
is,
the timeliness of addressing it at a national level.
Yeah.
But it's very difficult for us to have clarity
on what the extent of the spread is really.
And this is not really clear from this information what that
is.
And then it's
understanding
what practical timely interventions minimize that
spread.
And of course, acknowledging that this is adding to all those existing problems we
have.
Yeah.
The wines don't go away, we just add mad rag to it.
And I guess our concern would be, or at least that's what I thought we'd previously
discussed. Our concern would be that there is sufficient
urgency,
and investment in stopping it early as much as
we can,
rather than having to-
Yeah
... you know.
Yeah. And I think-
See it across the whole country and become a much bigger problem.
So what I've seen from two and a bit years in the role is that these
responses work best when we've got an all of government and
industry together. So your GIA partnership, you look at the fruit fly
responses, they work absolutely seamlessly because we're
working together with industry.
So a key thing is this meeting that we're going to be having shortly to try and
bring together the industry on this, because there are going to be elements to
this in terms of control. They're going to be well outside the scope
of our knowledge within government.
Personally, as a farmer, I'm looking at this situation and I would be
thinking, "Actually, if this was my farm, there'd need to
be some system changes." So one of the things you'll see in here
is they talk about how after 2022,
it suddenly seemed to emerge more, and that was due to a shift from
sheep to beef on these properties. Now, sheep were actually eating it.
Now, thankfully, and that's because the value of sheep at the time was
pretty rock bottom. Wool prices were rock bottom.
Beef prices were starting to climb.
So people made an economic transition to that's sensible.
Now, thankfully at the moment, sheep's doing well and wool's actually improving as
well. So, is there knowledge that have been given to these
farmers that may be affected from the likes of, Beef and
Lamb who have the levy resources and the
farm system knowledge, same for Dairy and Z, to give advice to
these farmers as to here are some system changes that you could make to
your farm that will enable you to
assist in getting on top of these weeds whilst maintaining
a good income, because that's what it's going to take.
We
don't want to be in a situation where we're just like, I'm sure you wouldn't want
to be in a situation where we just glyphosinate the entire farm for a couple of
years, and then okay, now you can have your farm back.
It's about how do we manage this while still producing from that land.
So that's why I think it's so important that we actually get, and we have to have a
joined up approach with industry on this so that we can do
it properly. Because if we just rush in as government, I don't think
we'll come up with much in the way of useful solutions going
forward.
Would you agree with the importance of there being a national strategy around
it? Because obviously the objective is to protect
as much of the country as we can from spread.
I think the focus has to be Northland, because that's where we know it is.
We know that it's been there for over 20 years, and in that
20 years, we haven't seen any signs of it anywhere else in the
country. So I
think if you go too wide, you lose
impact on where you actually need to be focusing.
So yes, there might be a component of the
nationwide focus.
Quite frankly, the nationwide focus just needs to be for other farmers to
understand what it looks like and actually report it if they see it.
But predominantly the focus needs to be Northland.
Are you confident that the awareness within Northland
is rising fast enough amongst landowners?
I wouldn't have data to be able to give you a yes or
a no. I think we've got the campaign going.
Yeah.
It's only been two months now.
It's something the team will need to monitor to make sure
that, yes, this is having an impact.
And so for a lot of these
campaigns we've got, I do receive,
make sure I get feedback from the officials in terms of, "Okay,
how effective has that advertising campaign been or that awareness
campaign been? How many actual eyeballs have seen it?
Is it delivering value for money?"
Any further questions?
No.
Well, thanks for your time, Minister.
Pleasure.
I
hope you can get over that-
Hope so
... over the Easter break.
Yeah. Get some pseudo.
Exactly.
Exactly. Some of my drool if you need it.
Getting better.
We have Mayor Greg.
Steve?
Morning, Stuart.
Morning.
Thank you for making the time today.
I've got some of my handouts. Is that all right?
Yes, that'd be fantastic.
Oh, good. We love pictures.
It's all we understand.
likes the color in.
Thank you.
Thanks, as I said, for your time. We obviously have
been doing a watching brief on
the yellow-legged hornet, which is quite a concern for everyone,
and
have been following with interest your
progress, and just would love an update to see where you are and
what you've learned this season, because there's been some pretty cool technology
that you've been using as well.
Yeah. No, there is. Yeah. No, look, thank you, and thanks for the opportunity to
come and update you on it. It's been a busy response, this
one. It's quite a big job. But
overall, we're pretty comfortable with where it's at and how it's going.
We've got a pretty good picture, or we do have a very good picture
of where these hornets are in that part of the North Shore, Greenfield, Birkdale,
largely.
All the finds to date are all within that area and the
zone that we're focused on.
The eradication still very much remains our goal and our
focus with this response,
and as I say, there isn't evidence of any wider spread.
The focus
has been, and still remains on finding the queens.
So tracking and tracing hornets to find queens and the
nests so that we can eliminate the queens to prevent them from
overwintering and then producing more next summer,
next spring.
Right through, we have and remain guided by
our technical advisory group of science experts
and our own experts.
Everything we've done, the approach, the tracking methodology, is
all based on the advice of international
and New Zealand expertise,
and they remain
very satisfied with what we're doing and the progress of where we're
at.
Public support has also been fantastic with this.
We've had
about 16,000 notifications from the public to us,
and that's from across the country as well, from well outside of
Auckland.
But those communities have been fantastic, really, in
supporting the response to allowing people putting traps in their backyards and
walking through their gardens and so on.
So we really appreciate that too. And we are working really
closely with our industry partners, the beekeeping industry as well,
to have them connected and engaged into the response.
Just some key figures on where we're at.
You'll see from the maps there, the dots and the traps.
We've got about 1,200 traps distributed across the area.
We have about 100 people in the field,
generally, on any day,
out there checking traps and tracking and tracing and so on.
We have just started-- We can talk a little bit more about this or
answer any questions. We started with deploying the Vespex
poison that's used in New Zealand for wasps,
deploying that in the outer zone, and we'll work our way in with that
in terms of mopping out any hornets that may
escape our tracking and tracing.
About 3,800 Vespex bait stations.
We've found 77 queens so far,
132 nests,
and
a few thousand workers.
Over the last week or two, we
have dropped off in terms of the number of nests we're finding.
This week, so far, we have just found the one.
You'll see there's a graph in
one of the pages of the picture
and the times.
Sorry, Stuart. How many nests in total?
132.
Thanks.
This week, only one so far, and our field teams have-
Is
that it?
Yes, that one. Yep. Have observed fewer
hornets out and about in their work on the ground
with the trapping.
Like I said, the public engagement's been great.
We did a mail drop to 100,000-Residents in the
North Shore, we've had those 16,000 notifications.
As I say, we've been following the tag.
We have brought UK experts over twice.
They were here in January and then again just recently.
They just left for about three weeks at a time.
Two of the leading experts from the UK that have been dealing with
these hornets over in the UK for the last few years.
They were enormous help to us in terms of our field operations and our approach,
and they've added a lot
to our expertise.
We have the tracking technology, which you may have seen,
which has been hugely beneficial in terms of finding these nests.
So it's a tiny little
radio tracking device that gets-- Catch the hornet live,
attach the little device to it, it flies off, and our people then
track, find the nest. That's been hugely effective
in terms of finding a lot of these nests.
It's great technology from the Netherlands.
We're just starting with AI
cameras that we borrowed from the UK,
to use those around our feeding trips,
using AI recognition with the camera, which will
just support our field activity and people visually
on the ground watching these feeding nests.
So that's great as well.
So where we're at now, the focus still remains track, trace, find as
many as we can. The goal is before winter, when the queens would
hibernate, that we try and find any queens that are out there and kill them,
so that none survive the winter. So we're still very much focused on that and that
field activity. We're laying the poison out, like I say, working our way in.
We'll continue with that. There will come a point where we're in
winter and the workers will all die
off. If there are any queens, they will hibernate, so we won't find them, but the
goal is to try and stop any surviving through into the winter.
But we know, and then at that point, so probably in the next month or so or during
May,
our experts, the scientists will look at where we're at,
give us a bit of a view on what they think in terms of have we found them all
or could there still be some, and where we will plan for
next season.
Even if we feel we've found them all, we'll still be, at the very
least, we'll be doing some surveillance activity in spring and summer.
And there may be some further mop-up activity, but.
So we'll get into the planning and the crystallizing of
that, over the next month or so.
So, look, that's broadly where we're at.
Angus McKay is our assistant commissioner who has largely been
running the response for us, looks after our responses,
and Scott Sinclair, who's our science expert, readiness manager.
Scott's our
lead on the science technical side of things for the response.
But of course, yeah, happy for any questions, discussion.
Thank you very much.
Start off with Sue. Has a question.
I just had some
questions about the cost, in terms of-- And two aspects of it, the
cost of
your response to date-
Yep
... and estimated costs going into the future, and also what you predict the cost
to the industry would be if this
did get away on us, so to speak.
Yep.
So, to the end of June, this financial year,
we're
thinking that it'll probably land up close to around $14 million
for this year, the activity.
The cost
going forward,
we'll get a better handle on that, as we develop the plan for
spring, summer next year, what that level of activity is likely to
be and what the costs associated with that.
We have also commissioned
an analysis of cost benefit and
impacts, implications for industry.
A better view of implications for industry sector,
horticulture, pollination, et cetera, were this to be a more widely
established pest in New Zealand. So, we will get that
over the next few months. We'll get some data.
But you don't know at this stage what-
We don't know exactly. When this started off, what
we know is from what's happened overseas,
and the impacts overseas on industries and sectors.
And so for the likes of France, we know that what
they have seen,
where it's become widely established and can't be
eradicated. They've seen up to in some cases
30% losses in honeybee hives,
and the flow-on impacts in terms of-
Yeah
... pollination services-
Full stop
... honey production.
So we know what's been seen in Europe and the UK.
But we obviously
don't know exactly what the impacts would be on New Zealand,
but it's something that we want to try and eradicate and not
have established here, hence the focus on what we're doing.
Okay. Thank you.
Steve. So I
think on your page two ,
you show the
5-kilometer detection buffer, which is the
central area with a yellow line, and then you've got your
11-kilometer detection buffer. How much has been
found in between the 5K and the 11K?
How many nests?
So at the moment, nothing.
No.
So everything, all the nests that we've found are
either within that A zone where the center of that yellow circle is
actually an A zone, which is one kilometer out from each nest that we've found.
We are just starting to find some of the males are moving out into the B zone, so
that's the yellow area there.
Mm. So the-
Yeah
... A zone is the orange.
A zone's right in the middle there-
Yeah
... where the red things are.
Yeah.
And then the B zone is the yellow, and then the C zone is where the pink is
out to 11 kilometers.
But you've found nothing in the C zone yet?
No.
That's great. And then on the next page over,
you've got active Vespex station and
completed Vespex station. Can you explain the meaning of those terms?
So with the Vespex, which is a bait with a
fipronil insecticide in it.
Yeah.
So they can only go out for about a week, and then the bait
deteriorates, and you have to take it back in again.
Right.
So we've got teams out on the ground,
put the bait out, and then a week later, somebody follows around and takes it away.
Yeah.
So during that week's time, it should be
effective in killing wasps and hornets in that area.
I've got a final question.
Yes.
Yeah. So what is the significance of...
Do I interpret correctly that the week of the 16th of February was the last
time you've detected a nest with a queen present
from that chart?
No. So the yellow one is queens that we actually found in
the environment.
Right.
So that's like in a trap we found a queen.
The blue ones are actually we found a queen within a nest.
Oh, okay. So you're still detecting queens in nests up to
the 23rd of March.
Yeah, that's right.
So
is that a
useful sign that you're only getting them in nests and not getting them in the
environment?
Yeah. So
at this time of year, you would never expect to find a queen in the environment.
It was a very-
Yeah
... very rare case. So-
... when we're adding up our nests here with queens within the nest or
nests where we haven't found a queen-
Yeah
...
it's often very difficult operationally to recover the queen from a nest that we
destroy. So the process for the destroyed nest is to use a long
lance with perforations around the outside that penetrates the
nest, and then you inject an insecticide powder into that nest.
If the nest is really big, then we normally get the nest intact.
But a lot of our nests we're actually finding before they get to a huge
stage, and so part of that process involves a bit of damage to the nest.
Yeah.
And as part of that, a lot of those hornets just fall out dead.
And so we're missing the queen a lot of the time because it's been impacted by the
insecticide. But again, we're operating often in really dense bush
reserves, up the top of 30, 40-meter trees and things like that.
And so making sure we get some of these nests down intact with all the hornets that
were present in that nest is sometimes really challenging.
Our best information on this technique, which is
what we've gleaned from our UK colleagues who've been over here, who have developed
this technique,
is that this is
effectively 100% effective on killing the queen, but they
don't always capture the queen as well.
Their evidence for that is then going back to these locations the next
year, putting up traps and not finding any hornets the next
year, and that's something they do on a regular basis.
And they show very effectively that they're killing the queen, even though
they don't recover it.
Can I ask a follow-up on there?
Yeah, sure.
I know when I kill a wasp nest, I wait till after dark, when presumably all the
wasps have gone back to the nest. Are you doing that?
Are you waiting till after dark?
So we're trying to do it in the evening, but there's a whole lot of health and
safety implications for our staff working up the top of some of these trees
in the dark as well.
Right.
So we're trying to manage the health and safety of our operational personnel
at the same time.
Okay, so the answer is not necessarily.
Not necessarily.
Mike, you had this up.
Yeah. Thank you, Chair. I just had a question-
No, it's off
... on Vespex. That's a-
Yes
... protein-based source. Is that correct?
Yeah.
So is that fairly specific on a bee guys use it,
and the wasps always in the autumn are after protein.
Is that effective the rest of the year?
So the timing for the deployment of Vespex is typically towards the autumn.
And the hornets follow a similar pattern to the
wasps.
Wasps, yeah.
Earlier in the year, they're focused more on carbohydrates, and they switch towards
protein later in the year.
So is there any alternative poison that you can use outside of that autumn
period?
Not really-
Not really
... based on the EPA sort of regulations.
Okay.
Yeah.
Jo.
Thank you. I've got a couple of things I want to ask.
I'm going to be cheeky and ask them in the one question.
The first part is, I'm interested to know how the little tracking
devices have worked,
that you've been able to attach to the insects.
And then the second one is following on from Soh's question in regards to the
financial costs and implications.
Has there been any conversations or is there likely to be,
depending
on what's going on, conversations with those involved in the
horticulture and beekeeping sector as to whether they may
end up needing to look to pay a
financial contribution to the response to this, like we had with bovines?
Different, I suppose, because they pay a levy, but
whether there has been any thinking or talking to the
industries that would be most affected.
I might just talk to the finance bit of it-
Yeah
... and then Scott and Ings can talk about the tracking.
So yes, we have been running this
in a partnership with Government and Industry Agreement, GIA partners.
So we've had some of the sectors
who are signatories in the horticulture space-
Mm
... as part of the governance and decision-making and
part of the response.
They would and are making a financial contribution
towards the response.
And so going forward for next year, we'll have another conversation-
Mm
... as to whether they wish to participate, and then part of it will
be the cost-benefit analysis in terms of potential impacts on their part
of the sector. I think as we may have spoken about
late last year with
yourselves-Not all of
the sectors directly impacted or beneficiaries here are signatories-
Mm
... to the GIA framework. And so the beekeeping
industry, the honey industry, are not signatories to
GIA.
So they are not part of the GIA
response-
Mm
... making a financial contribution.
However, we are actively and have actively been engaging with them and
including them
in the response, getting their input.
We are relying on quite a large number, a few hundred
beekeepers-
Mm
... in the area who have been supporting trapping and surveillance
work as well.
Yeah.
So there is a contribution to the response coming
from the beekeeping industry through those beekeepers in
the broader zone. Yeah.
Okay. And the weed devices?
So the trackers have worked really well.
So maybe on the graph, you'll see we had a little peak at the start of the
response.
Yeah.
So that was when we were actually going out searching properties for a little
primary nest. And the hornet's quite small at that stage, so you can't
use the trackers. So as we move through the year, the hornets grow,
feed a lot more, and you get a lot more workers, and they get bigger.
And then at that stage, we can actually attach the trackers to them.
They've proved really successful.
So at the moment, pretty much everything we're finding is using the trackers.
That's great.
So out of the 120 odd nests, about half of them have been found with
the trackers.
Wow, that's good.
The company in Holland are making a much smaller tracker-
Oh, okay
... and we're hoping to get that out probably May, June.
And that will let, we can use that a lot earlier in the season-
Nice
... hopefully. Yeah, but they've worked really well.
Yeah. Thank you.
Like you had a primary. No good. That's it. Thanks.
Okay. Steve, and then Brooke.
Yeah. Mine is just, so what does the response look like
over the coming year and into next season?
And do you keep the same level of intensity?
And
presumably once you're past the
hibernation period-
Mm
... you'll be assuming you're going to find some more, or at least checking
that there are none.
Yeah, so
as I said, once we get further in here, probably in the next
month or so to May, as it cools down, start
getting towards winter,
and based on how our track and trace goes over this next
period,
with the technical experts, we'll get a bit of a sense of
how
far we think we've got in terms of eradication.
Regardless of that, you're right.
There will absolutely be surveillance kicking from the
spring because that is when if any queens have survived,
that's when they'll emerge. So we know that we will be doing
surveillance and trapping. The scale of what the response
activity could look like,
we need to get a bit further with this current season's activity,
but we will be planning and preparing to be able
to do response activity, track and tracing, et cetera,
if it's needed-
Yeah
... if any emerge come spring, summer.
And it seems pretty likely that it will.
It would be pretty exceptional if there was none,
do you think, at this stage?
Do you-
I mean, that would be a fantastic result obviously.
It would be a fantastic result, right.
Things are trending really well, but-
Yeah
... we have to wait and see. The proof will be in the pudding.
Yeah.
Right.
Starting next year again, if we do have to go again, we are in
a really strong position given what we've learnt this year.
We're not starting from zero again.
So that will be a really big advantage for us going again next year.
Brill. Brooke.
Yeah. Look, you've talked about the goal of eradication.
As someone who's just sitting in on this committee, I'm kind of interested in
knowing, as we start getting closer, hopefully towards
eradication, what is it that you'd actually be looking at that would give
you confidence you are getting closer to eradication?
Is it that you're just not seeing any queens, or you're not seeing any nests?
Or
is it the absence of evidence? How do you actually measure that?
Difficult to measure, but that trend is really promising.
So we have anecdotal evidence from our field staff out there who are
seeing fewer hornets in the environment. This is really promising.
The fact that it's getting harder and harder to find nests is really promising.
All the nests that we do find are taken off to the lab and are dissected,
so we can understand the stage
that our population has developed to, and we're yet to see any nests that
show evidence of the next generation of queens being produced.
Mm.
So this has also been positive so far.
It's always what's out there that we haven't found is the worry.
But given how effective our field teams have been,
it seems like there might be some more nests out there, but I'm confident that
they'll get to them in the coming weeks.
The final one is, what's the
bit of it that keeps you awake at night in terms of what you might have missed?
Is it conceivable that there's some
hornets have got outside the entire detection area and,
or hitchhiked on the back of a vehicle out of a
area and...
Well, what's that bit? Presumably you think in your
diligence around the whole issue, you must have these fears.
What do they look like, so we get some idea of that?
I think every week we're always assessing what we're doing and trying to
think what more we can do.
Mm.
I think the international experience and the technical advisory group from
across Europe and-Having those UK guys come
out has given us a lot of confidence that the plan we've got is the right
plan, and we're doing the right thing.
Mm.
I think,
obviously, as you get down to fewer and fewer nests, it's harder to find them.
Mm.
So I guess the concern for me is that we leave a nest,
and next year we've got more hornets, so we've got to deal with them again.
Yeah.
And
we've done so much work, and we've done so well that we don't want to do that.
Yeah.
So it's just- I think it's keeping with the plan,
trying to find the nests we can in the next two to four weeks and
getting rid of them. And then real belt and braces is that
Vespex poison that we'll move into the inner zone
and try and kill anything that's left over.
But I think we just stick with the plan and
really good surveillance again next year.
We're working with all the beekeepers.
So there's about 9,000 beekeepers registered around New Zealand.
And these hornets eat
bees, so they're a really good- -surveillance tool around the country.
And the public engagement has been fantastic as well, so we just need to
keep encouraging people to report what they're seeing because the sooner we find
something-
Yes
... the sooner we can deal with it.
Auckland has great people, even on the North Shore.
You were going so well.
Have all the nests been found in the bush?
No. Absolutely everywhere. There's a picture,
this picture here kind of gives you an idea of where we're finding the
nests.
Mm.
Inside the wall of a house, that one on the top right is
where we've had to go-
Cut a door
... cut the door out and take a nest out.
Mm.
The one to the left of it is an old little polystyrene fish bin, and there was a
hole in it.
Oh my God.
And the hornets have made a nest in there.
Inside walls, on fences, and then the ones high up in the trees are
the bigger secondary nests, which is where they usually build them up high
in trees.
We have used the thermal drone, and we have, with an idea that there was a
nest in a reserve. We've used the thermal drone to actually find it.
Wow.
So, yeah, we're-
That's very cool
... trying absolutely everything to find these things.
Yeah. Quite spectacular-looking things. They're made out of mud, aren't they?
Are they?
They're using mud.
Paper.
Oh, yeah.
So they produce the paper.
They chew up bits of bark and wood. Same as wasps.
They chew it up, and so cellulose, that they then build the nest out of.
It's amazing. Very intricate.
Mm-hmm.
Tricky little beggars.
Any further questions?
What does gynes mean? What's a gyne?
A gyne is the next generation of queen.
So it's a reproductive female. So as the
colony moves through its cycle,
females are generally workers.
Yeah.
But as they start getting fed more and more, and we go in through
later in the season, so we actually don't know what the trigger is.
They turn into a queen.
They start to become a,
what can become a future queen. So-
And that's a gyne.
That's a gyne.
So that's the stage in between.
Yes. So these will then go out into the environment.
They'll mate with the males, and then they'll go off to hibernate over the winter,
and when they pop out the next year is when they'll become a queen and start the
new colony.
Thank you.
Very good. That was very informative. Hey, thank you very much for your time.
Well done, Shane. Really appreciate it. Well done.
Thank you.
Well done.
Thanks very much.
And it's fascinating.
I'm guessing you'd
be able to incorporate some of this, what you learned through this, with
other
biosecurity exclusions.
Yeah.
Yeah. No, absolutely. Yeah, we're always learning with these
responses.
Mm.
So yeah, we do. Yeah.
Excellent.
Keep going.
No, no. You've got someone for some work on the make, Greg.
All proud of you.
Thank you.
It's amazing.
Thank you. Thank you. See you, Andrew. See you, Mark.
Thank you.
Be curious.